our parasitized caterpillar has spent
the last 12 days gorging itself it now
appears profoundly obese but this is not
all the fat the drummer after wasp
larvae lie just under its skin each is
the size of a grain of rice but together
they account for over a third of the
caterpillars weight
the larvae have not yet finished growing
and need to keep their hosts alive so
although they feast on the caterpillars
blood they have been careful not to
touch a single one of its vital organs
this uneasy truce will not last within
days the larvae are fully matured
suddenly they begin to stir into action
for the past two weeks this surrogate
womb has protected them but now they no
longer needed to complete the next stage
of their lifecycle
they must break out the caterpillars
thick skin should be a solid barrier to
the parasitic wasp larvae but as their
bodies have grown they have developed
tiny saw like teeth these jagged jaws
are for one job only cutting their way
out
stroke by stroke the larvae slice
through the tough layers of skin
at the same time they release chemicals
that paralyze the caterpillar
as the larvae break through there is
nothing it can do
free at last the larvae enter a new
phase of development they swiftly spin
silken cocoons these will provide the
perfect environment for their final
transformation but ironically one of the
greatest dangers the larvae will face is
being themselves impregnated by other
species of parasitic wasp incredibly the
wounded caterpillar helps them out
usually a caterpillar would spin a
silken blanket to make its own cocoon
but the parasitized caterpillar spins
his blanket on top of the wasp cocoons
giving them an extra layer of protection
scientists believe the same wasp virus
that infected it weeks before has now
invaded the caterpillars brain and
caused this bizarre corruption of its
normal behavior amazingly the
caterpillars natural aggression is now
also exploited by the wasp virus
the caterpillar becomes a bodyguard
actively protecting the cocoons from
other parasites it will watch over them
unceasingly until it eventually starves
to death